# ai-case-study
# Nuance's Dragon: Medically Speaking
## Overview and origin
## Company:  Nuance Dragon Medical One, owned by Microsoft
In the healthcare space, there are a few AI solutions utilized by physicians to aid in their documentation of patient notes.  The most widely used and highly rated is Nuance Dragon Medical One (aka Dragon), currently owned by Microsoft.
Voice dictation and speech recognition are important tools because when utilized correctly, they reduce the amount of time a physician spends typing, they improve accuracy of patient notes, and they assist in the correct billing for services rendered to the patient.
Dragon was founded in 1982 by James and Dr. Janet Baker, a husband-and-wife team.  And by 1990, they had developed the world’s first continuous speech dictation system. But it wasn’t until 1997 that Dragon, as a discreet voice recognition system was released for the public to purchase and use. For a complete timeline of Dragon’s evolution from a single license PC based desktop application to a cloud based ambient AI solution visit this site:
[Dragon timeline](https://www.nuance.com/asset/en_us/collateral/healthcare/infographic/ig-dmo-evolution-en-us.pdf)
## Business Activities
The first few iterations of Dragon Naturally Speaking (as it was known in the late 1990’s and early 2000’s) were awkward to use and limited in features.  It was individual license based, which meant each license purchased was associated to and installed on a specific PC.  This restricted physicians to dictating their notes on a designated PC, and if something happened to that PC, physicians were stuck. Another challenge was the actual voice recognition.  If you had an accent of any kind, or even if you had a head cold, the system would not recognize many of the spoken words, requiring physicians to manually edit their dictations and this would take time away from the patient.  Dragon was oft criticized among medical professionals for these shortcomings.  

As Dragon made numerous updates to its software, it saw an increase in popularity among physicians.  In 2005, as physician practices and health systems were beginning to transition from paper medical records to electronic medical records, Dragon was purchased by Nuance, which provided needed financing and marketing support.  This allowed Dragon to keep up with the demand from providers and healthcare systems.  With the backing from Nuance, Dragon evolved into a cloud-based solution utilizing an ambient artificial intelligence structure.  By making the platform cloud-based, this solved the problem of restricting physicians to a local PC.  And by establishing an AI structure, this helped Dragon overcome the voice recognition challenges involving accents because it allowed the user to train the system to recognize their voice and interpret their accent.
## Landscape
Dragon became so popular among healthcare systems and physicians that Microsoft bought Nuance in 2022 so they could add their knowledge and expertise to the Dragon AI product and continue its growth in market share. Microsoft’s Azure platform has paired well with Dragon Medicine One AI and allows the dictation software to be rolled out to entire healthcare systems efficiently.  The financial backing from Microsoft and access to its Azure technology have given Dragon a clear advantage over its competitors.  Some of their key competitors in the healthcare space being 3M MModal, IBM Watson Speech to Text, and DeepScribe.  Their competitors are unable to roll out their programs with the efficiency of Microsoft and with the licensing fee structure that Microsoft offers.  These two items alone make Dragon Medicine One very attractive to healthcare systems.  There is a third attraction to the product, which their competitors are on equal playing field with Dragon, and that is the ability to integrate with most electronic medical record systems (EMRs) being utilized.  The three big electronic medical record software providers (Epic, Cerner, Allscripts) have made it easier for physicians and healthcare systems to integrate their voice dictation/transcription software by making their EMR platforms agnostic to voice dictation solutions.
## Results
How do we measure the success of any medical voice dictation/transcription system?  First, look at KLAS.  Started in 1996, KLAS is a research company in the healthcare space driven to improve healthcare worldwide. They focus on health information technology (HIT) and do extensive research and anonymous interviews of users, clients, and vendors to gain insight into specific technology, its usefulness and attractiveness to physicians and allied health professionals (nurse practitioners, physicians’ assistants, physical therapists, occupational therapists, etc.)  KLAS establishes a score card for the specific technology being researched and then establishes annual reviews and ratings.  Dragon Medicine One has been rated Best in KLAS four years in a row, since 2021.  

A second way to measure the success of a voice dictation/transcription system is through accuracy rates. Dragon Medicine One has a 98% accuracy rate for dictations and transcriptions, thus significantly reducing the physician’s need to edit her/his notes, saving them valuable time.   Accuracy rates are tracked via the number of edits made per dictation or transcription, then aggregating that number into scorecards within the software application.  This allows both physicians and healthcare leadership to easily view accuracy at any given point in time.  

I have spent most of my career working as an IT project manager implementing technology for hospitals.  I’ve had a front row seat to the technology challenges facing doctors, nurses and allied health professionals.  I have implemented bad technology and useful technology, and by healthcare standards some cutting edge technology.  Early on in my career, Dragon was hard to install and even harder to support. Licenses were limited and often the desktop PCs, where we had to install the app locally, were woefully inadequate.  Then there was the microphone installs needed to work with the application.  Only a select few brands of microphones would work with Dragon; they were expensive and easily lost. Physician satisfaction was not high. However, since so many physicians had limited keyboarding skills, they still preferred to voice dictate, and use the two-finger method to edit their dictations.  

In the early 2000’s there was a paradigm shift in healthcare.  The federal government mandated that hospitals and physician practices begin using electronic medical records (EMRs), thus doing away with the paper and pen and forcing physicians to work within the technology provided to them.  The older physicians struggled to adapt, but the young physicians fresh out of medical school demanded more and better technology.  Suddenly, we had physicians, nurses and pharmacists working within the hospital IT departments.
The acquisition of Dragon by Nuance in 2005 was perfectly timed.  Dragon had a solid footprint within hospitals as hospitals were being forced to go all electronic for patient medical records. Dragon was on the cusp of making their product smarter and more efficient by developing an AI version.  Nuance provided the needed cash for R&D and marketing to help bring Dragon into the 21st century of Artificial Intelligence.
## Recommendation(s)
Today, I would recommend that Microsoft continue to fuel R&D for their Dragon Medicine One AI product. I would also advise that they work more closely with the big three EMR companies – Epic, Cerner, and Allscripts, to make the voice dictation or transcription of patient notes populate more fluidly within the EMRs so that it is easier to locate and edit the notes and allow physicians to take better advantage of smart phrases and templates within speech technology.  Push the AI ambient scribe technology as much as possible to reduce the number of key clicks physicians must make.
According to the American Medical Association (AMA), AI powered scribes have saved physicians one hour each day.  I know from my hospital IT experience, saving a physician one hour a day is a huge win!  It’s a win for the physician, for the patient, and for revenue cycle. Link to the AMA article:  
https://www.ama-assn.org/practice-management/digital/ai-scribe-saves-doctors-hour-keyboard-every-day
### List of References
1. [Nuance website]  (https://www.nuance.com/healthcare/dragon-ai-clinical-solutions/dragon-medical-one.html)
2. [Dragon timeline from inception]  (https://www.nuance.com/asset/en_us/collateral/healthcare/infographic/ig-dmo-evolution-en-us.pdf)
3. [KLAS Research website] (https://klasresearch.com/)
4. [KLAS Best in Speech award to Nuance]  (https://klasresearch.com/best-in-klas-ranking/speech-recognition-front-end-ehr/2024/317)
5. [American Medical Association Speech Recognition]  (https://www.ama-assn.org/practice-management/digital/ai-scribe-saves-doctors-hour-keyboard-every-day)
6. [Microsoft acquisition of Nuance]  (https://news.microsoft.com/2022/03/04/microsoft-completes-acquisition-of-nuance-ushering-in-new-era-of-outcomes-based-ai/)



